Database keywords:
Keyword: Data Integrity
Entity Integrity
Referential Integrity
Domain Integrity

Relation in math terms

Relation vs relationship in database is not related at all

data type (number, date, text) three most general category of data type

there another types but derived from those three.

database char type vs text.

foreign key constraint

parent vs child relation: child cannot exist without parent.

database keywords:
data vs Database
special kind of database called relational Database
DBMS (database management system) vs RDBMS (Relational DBMS)

Null (data type)
anomalies (database) vs Integrity (database)

Database Design terms
Entity (database): what the database is stored about (user data, sales data)
Attributes (database): things the database store about the entity;
Relation (database/math): table=> connection between two sets of data.
Tuple (database/math): row of the relation table. represent one specific entity (object instantiation of data);
table: physical representation of a relation. with its rows and columns

This is older terms:
file (database) = table (relation)
record (database) = row (tuple)
field (database) =  columns (Attributes)

Values (database): the data stored in one specific row at one specific column.=Cell in excel term.
Entry (database) = row (tuple)
schema: drawn out structure of the database

normalization (database)=> this is a new term learn more. Steps to fix anomalies and maintain integrity.
Naming convention (database)=>consistency along the works
Keys (database)=>something unique in a table which used to make connections to other tables.

SQL (Structured Query Language)
DDL (Data Definition Language) part of SQL define the structure of the database
DML (Data Manipulation Language);
SQL Keywords : SELECT, UPDATE, ALTER etc. preferably write them in capital letters.

joins = connect more than one tables (usually two) to create new table. NOTE: this is only a view the combined table is not really an instances stored in the database server.
when the instances is in the view level it will not be persisted thus after done used it will be destroyed.

ATOMIC VALUE (database) = the value stores just one thing! (each columns must only about one thing!) NOTE: this is a best practice example for long name to be break to first, middle and last names.

RELATIONSHIP (DATABASE)
NOTE: rather than store all data in one big table it advisable to contain it in numerous table to make data to be more manageable.

One to one vs One to Many vs Many to Many (database relationship types);
QUESTION: If this one to one relation will it be one relation only(one table for both entity relation?)

One to Many Relationship: example=> this is the confusing part. example is comment and user relation. The user can make multiple comment but one specific instance of comment can only be traced back to one user only.

QUESTION: what about the student (entity) to class (entity) relation? This is many to many relationship; since one instance of student can take multiple instances of class (entity) and one instance of class (entity) can have more than one instances of student (entity);

REVIEW: Many to Many Relationship=> This more confusing on the example side. But the main idea is all instances of each entity can have multiple relationship with instances on the other side of their entity relation.
WARNING: many to many relationship will not work in the relational database (well by default anyways), the types that work (out of the box that is) are one to one and one to many relationship.

Design One to One Relationship;
REVIEW: the attribute will be exclusive to one entity thus the other entity will be better converted to an attribute to one of the two entity thus we can make it into one table (relation).
QUESTION: is there any scenario where we have to make separate relation (table) for two entities which have one to one relationship?
The answer is yes there will be. This is when the second entity of the relation has additional data that exclusive to their primary key rather than to the first entity primary key.
EXAMPLE: person and social number card relationship; this is an exclusive one to one relationship. But when the social number entity will save data on the issue date of the card for periodic changes and checking then it will be better to make two relations of person and social security relations and connect them by the social security PK as FK in the holder relation as Social security number attribute.

IDEA: Design One to Many relationship
HACK: make two relations with foreign key to the single (One side) of the One to Many relationship. this is also known as Parent Child relationship.
REVIEW: parent child relationship.

QUESTION: how to use two relations (tables) to make both useful relations?

QUESTION: how to differentiate the one to many to one to one relationships?
HACK: well the main difference is if both relations have foreign keys that refer to the other side of the table then it is one to one relationship, if in the parent table does not have foreign key refer to child table then it is one to many relationship!

IDEA: Parent and Child relationship
HACK: the primary key of the Parent is the foreign key in the Child.

IDEA: Designing Many to Many relationship
HACK: break them apart into two One to Many Relationship. (M:N) -> (1:N) + (1:M)! Use the intermediary or junction table.
REVIEW: the intermediary positioned between M and N table. Then the intermediary will list the M primary key and N primary key as foreign keys. If one row from M is deleted then it can put the constraint to delete all data in intermediary table which has foreign key = M primary key to the deleted row.
NOTE: here is some example of designing the many to many relationship diagram https://drawio-app.com/entity-relationship-diagrams-with-draw-io/. Pay attention to the entity example there is one example where the associative entity is showed. The associative entity is drawn with dashed outline on the box and connector.

IDEA: Introduction to Keys
REVIEW: this is already pretty clear what key is? the main idea is to use or add if necessary a unique attribute that cannot be duplicated to other row of the relation entity. The key to certain data entity row cannot be changed ever and never have null value.
NOTE: natural key is the key that supplied with the real entity data (for example in some case is email as key to a user data). The opposite of the natural is synthetic key which added by the database but not originated from the user entity data.

IDEA: Primary Key Indexes
REVIEW: this indexing is collection of keys in a relation that will make the DBMS much easier to find the rest of the data based on that specific key. This will be very helpful when user want to seek data to certain entity. Also useful when user want to make join relation.
WARNING: all keys in the relational database in many SQL based DBMS must be indexed to be used properly. This includes foreign keys in the relation also.

IDEA: Foreign Keys
REVIEW: the definition is already clear. But there is another thing that makes this kind of key very useful especially when coupled with look up table. The foreign key is the reference ID from one relation to another relation (most likely in one to many relationship) which the foreign key will refer to parent or one relation side. Thus in order to change the data of any relation data we only need to change one row of the parent relation to affect the whole other data in many relation side. Plus the designer can add foreign key constraint to prevent null values and unauthorized SQL injection also handles delete process for certain data in parent relation.
NOTE: the foreign key name in one relation does not have to be the same as the primary key which it referred to.
HACK: keys protect the data integrity, keeps everything unique, improve database functionalities by increasing processing speed and less the process for updates. Allows added complexity also.

IDEA: Look up tables
REVIEW: this is often misunderstood as parent table since by definition this will work mostly in one to many relationship. Unfortunately many designers thought that parent is the more important data and the child has only additional attributes. But the look up table reverse this dogma since look up consist of attributes that added to the main relation but the look up is the one side in the one to many relation. This is where the foreign key will play major role.

IDEA: Super key and candidate keys.
REVIEW: This where I think I have it all wrong. Super Key is all the column in the database that can be used as key. While candidate key is the least number of combination of columns that can served as key.
NOTE: Sometimes when the designer want to use natural data attribute to make a key there are none. However a  combination of few non key attributes (columns) can make such natural key.
HACK: First and Last Name are not a good candidate for a key. But First, Last, Date of Birth and Address might do the job, even it is not recommended since address can be easily changes throughout the life of the individual.

IDEA: Foreign Key
REVIEW: the keyword is Reference. learn more about SQL reference.
NOTE: A relation can have multiple foreign keys but each column of that foreign keys can only reference to specific one primary key of a relation. Meaning no foreign key can have more than one relation PK as its reference!

IDEA: Non Null Keys
REVIEW: when it comes to primary key it must not be Null thus it is a must that the designer put Non Null attribute type when it comes to the Primary Key attribute (column). On the other hand foreign key is not the same as Primary key even to the primary key it is referred to. There are cases where the designer can allow user to put null there if the entry is not mandatory. Therefore in some cases the Non Null type is not implemented to some foreign keys. But if the entry is mandatory for the user to fill then the designer can make the foreign key attribute to be Non Null type.

IDEA: Foreign Key Constraint
REVIEW: to keep the Referential Integrity. Ensure the update related to all relations with reference to the parent. Or invoke error if the child has updates that failed to find any reference to the parent. THIS IS IMPORTANT SINCE THE INFORMATION ABOUT THIS RESTRICTION IS VERY LIMITED ACROSS THE INTERNET!
HACK: there are ON DELETE and ON UPDATE constraints.
NOTE: there are many kinds of constraint implementations (RESTRICT, CASCADE, SET NULL)
WARNING: RESTRICT will halt all changes (ON DELETE and/or ON UPDATE) TO THE PRIMARY KEY!!! the main keyword here is to the primary key. When ON DELETE this might gets a little blurry since you will delete the entire row in the parent table with the specific PK and if that PK is a reference to a FK in one or more child relation then it will throw an error and the delete process will be halted. This give an impression that the delete of each column in that row will throw this error which is wrong! This is proven when it comes to ON UPTADE constraint set to RESTRICT. When the PK is changed its value then the if that PK is a reference to FK in one or more child relation then it will invoke errors and halted the update. But if other columns in the parent table (relation) is updated then it will not invoke any error since the data is referenced and not showed in the child relation. CASCADE will on the other hand follow suit, ON DELETE when the PK and its row in the parent relation is deleted then the rows on the child relation(s) will also be deleted (PAY ATTENTION TO THE WHOLE ROW DELETED) the ON UPDATE will on this case the update on the PK value will also update the value of the FK that has reference to the updated PK. SET NULL meant when we delete the PK row in the parent relation the FK in which related to that PK will set to NULL. THIS IS IMPORTANT: same happens ON UPDATE! When the PK value is changed the FK will be set to NULL!! UNLIKE CASCADE!!
WARNING: to implement SET NULL type of restriction both ON UPDATE and ON DELETE the FK must not be set to have NON NULL characteristics.
COMBAK: Referential Integrity

IDEA: Simple Key, Composite Key, Compound Key
REVIEW: Simple key is a Key that only use one column data. Composite is key using two or more columns. Compound key have multiple columns but all of these columns are can be used as key themselves. The prime example of the Compound key is the intermediary table for Many to Many Relationship.
WARNING: not all DBMS have clear distinction between Composite vs Compound key as they often used interchangeably.
COMBAK: learn more on the Composite and Compound in designing Many to Many Relationship (this Caleb also has this video also)!
COMBAK: Learn how to make Compound and/or Composite Keys in the DBMS such as SQL.
NOTE: mostly Composite and Compound Keys are used in the intermediary relations.
HACK: some DBMS cannot work well with Compound and/or Composite keys thus they will use surrogate ID in it to cover for them.

IDEA: Entity Relationship Modelings
REVIEW: Basically this is talking about the ways to draw the design of a Database which is a model in this case. Such as PEFD for Chemical Engineers this is the standards of Database engineer use to document their idea on how the database system is designed. In short this teach us how to draw a diagram to model database entities.
COMBAK: EER Model, ERD Model, ER model, which of course ER is Entity Relationship
COMBAK: data definition Language (DDL)
HACK: to draw a relation is mostly a rectangle with the relation (table) name on it. The mostly it will consist of attributes names with its properties and/or restrictions;
COMBAK: read more on this attribute restrictions on SQL standards here: https://www.w3schools.com/sql/sql_constraints.asp.

IDEA: Cardinality
REVIEW: Relationship between data in one database relation to other relation which can be one to one, one to many, and many to many relationships.
WARNING: since one to one relationship is prone to make into one relation as an attribute and meanwhile many to many relationships will require intermediary relation meaning the Cardinality most likely will only dealt with one to many relationships.
HACK: this is usually represented by a line (dashed or solid) with crest to indicate one side and spread end to indicate many side.

IDEA: Modality
REVIEW: This define the relationship whether the cild's FK is required or can be null.
WARNING: This is related to FK only!!! meaning all row in the child relation must have FK referenced to the parent table if the modality of that relationship is one (1 or crest in the relationship line). On the other hand if the modality is zero then rows can exist in the child relation with FK is null meaning that row does not have reference to the parent relation.
HACK: this usually defined on the front of the child relation line with 0 or 1 (crest) WHICH can be translated the relation of one to (zero to many) for null able child relation FK and one to (at least one to many) for not null child relations.

IDEA: Intro to Data normalization.
REVIEW: Process to review the existing database design to come up with the most optimized design.
COMBAK: There are 1NF, 2NF, 3NF which NF is Normal Form.
COMBAK: data dependency.
WARNING: in normalization process the process must undergo 1NF first before 2NF and so on thus if the database is comply to 3NF meaning it is already comply the 1NF and 2NF

IDEA: 1NF (Atomicity)
REVIEW: atomicity means each column must contain the smallest information as possible (meaning putting JSON data in our case failed to comply with 1NF). And the most important we don't have repeating data for the PK.
HACK: if the column can be break into smaller details just add more nullable column but if the column data consist same data which is similar in kind (such as multiple email address) means the designer need to add another table (relation) with userID as FK and another column is email.

IDEA: 2NF (Partial dependency)
REVIEW: In order to have partial dependency we need Composite or Compound key. Since if we only have one PK then we don't need to dependent. This is most useful for many to many relationship since the intermediary table will need compund/composite keys. Partial dependency happens if one attribute (one column) is strongly dependent on one other column not the entire row which consist of key. In the case of composite key which consist of more than one column as key if another column (attribute) only dependent on one of those composite key and not all of those composite key this is called partial dependency.
QUESTION: what is data dependency?
COMBAK: if the table has key (for simplicity we just use 1 PK) all the attributes in the table is dependent to that PK to define one single entity (row). For example if there is a person table with PK personID then all attributes such as name, address, phone and email in that table is DEPENDENT to the personID to define a single entity. Even as if the user insert same name, address, etc if there are no Unique as index rule such as no same email allowed then the second entry of entity (row) will be considered as different entity in the database. The second data will dependent also to the second personID as it is different entity.
QUESTION: What if the person table need to add car (multiple cars allowed)!
COMBAK: Then we need a separate table for Cars with the owner data on it. However, we cannot use owner's name as the reference to the owner's data since the person's name is dependent on personID not vehicleID thus it need personID as FK on the car table as reference to owner's (person) data.
HACK: The most practical example is book and author relationship! As the author can writes as many books as he can and one book can have more than one author then it is really hard to make data dependency on Book to the author. Thus it best that books and author are not made onto one relation. This is a case of many to many relationship that it best to use intermediary relation between author and book relations.


IDEA: 3NF (transitive dependency)
REVIEW: transitive dependency happens when an attribute is dependent to another non PK attribute thus when that non PK attribute is changed the dependent attribute also must change! This is bad when the database relation is updated then when the non PK table is updated and the dependent table is not UPDATED the data integrity will be compromised since it will consist untrue data.
HACK: this mostly happen in the case where the table have a column with some data (like rating) and the other column define that column (in this case the rating column). Example being if the rating column only have type number and then the table have another column to define what that number means (ie. 5 means good and 1 mean worst)!
HACK: to fix this the dependent column must be moved to a different table and the definition can be referenced by ID (surrogate) as PK and that ID can be the FK in the main table. As this is definition the another table should be smaller in size compared to the main table.

IDEA: Indexes(Clustered, Non Clustered, Composite)
REVIEW: Index is needed because this will make data searching much faster. However, since this is the middle lane between time and space thus most likely only most accessed columns will be in the index. Most likely the index will contain keys since they should be the most likely searched attributes. However there is also downside of indexing. If we update the table we also must update the index!
NOTE: indexes usually preferable regardless of its type moreover when using JOIN operation.
QUESTION: non Clustered index? this kind of index does not really kept data but tells the pointer how to get to the data (example index behind the text book which list the page number of certain topic with keyword in the index) => CAN BE MORE THAN ONE IN DBMS!
QUESTION: clustered index? this is the actual data but sorted (example like an old phone book where the whole data are sorted alphabetically) => LIMITED TO ONE IN EACH DATABASE make sense since this clustered index sort the whole data thus there can be only one clustered index.
QUESTION: composite? Index that works on multiple (more than one) columns.

IDEA: Data Types.
REVIEW: Data types basically what kind of data format stored in each column (attribute). One column (attribute) must contain only one data type.
WARNING: WHENEVER YOU DEFINE DATABASE columns you MUST define the data type that will consist in that column and that column can ONLY HAVE ONE KND OF DATA TYPE!
QUESTION: how many types of data are they? Well that's depends on the DBMS but basically they will fall over three basic categories: Date, Numeric, String!
HACK: String has sub categories CHAR (set in length/the size is defined)-> CHAR(8) meaning it has 8 characters in it or VARCHAR (which does not required size to be defined!) and there also TEXT which more suitable if the String size is large!
HACK: Date can be: Date Time, Date, Time, and Timestamp... Other are self explanatory. The Timestamp is different one. Time stamp is the exact moment of time something is recorded!

IDEA: Intro to joins
REVIEW: This is like a presentable view. Since the database must adhere the normalization rules they most likely will be consist of multiple relations (tables) meaning it is good for the data integrity but will be confusing to read by humans. Thus we need joins to present the data in the most user friendly way by joining multiple tables thus the information is easier to read.
WARNING: to incorporate the join functions we need PK and FK relationships! since to join relations they must have relationship between them.
NOTE: here we officially start to the new chapter called Data Manipulation Language (DML).

IDEA: Inner Join
REVIEW: Inner join just like Venn diagram only show the data that is conjoin between two relations. Join will be used in multiple relations thus in order to run Inner Join the FK on the child relation must have relation in the parent relation! Thus if the FK in child in null even as join includes that column but the ROWS with null FK will not be shown in the Join result! Vice Versa is also true. If there are PK that does not have FK in child that row of data will also be omitted!
NOTE: If there are two relations one is the Customer relation and the other is Credit relation. The relationship is one to many with Customer relation as the parent and the FK in the Credit relation is referring to CustomerID PK in the Customer relation. However, the FK is set to allow NULL value. Meaning one customer can have multiple cards, one card can only have one customer, but there are cards that presented in the Credit relation that does not have customer to own them!. When this scenario is joined using inner join, only the card with FK that are not NULL will be shown in the result! The data from cards that do not have owner will be omitted. Vice versa if the Customer does not have Credit Card (the PK of the customer will not be presence in the FK of the child relation) that data will also be omitted from the join result!
HACK: SELECT <relation.attribute,....(more than one)> FROM <relation that is joined first> INNER JOIN relation that will be joined ON parent.PK = child.FK

IDEA: Inner Join on 3 tables (examples)
REVIEW: In order to join more than 2 tables using inner join most likely we must cascading the porcess. First inner join two tables and the result will be join to the next table and so on. There are no inner join directly for more than two tables.
NOTE: this is not really taught in the W3 Schools so pay attention more on this tutorial especially the example.
COMBAK: three relations users, comments, videos. relationships users 1:many comments; videos 1:many comments. Make inner join that result users.username, comments.comment, videos.title!
HACK: SELECT users.username, videos.title, comments.comment FROM users INNER JOIN  comments ON users.userID = comments.userID INNER JOIN videos ON videos.videoID = comments.videoID
NOTE: the INNER JOIN process was delivered twice in one query. But I am certain the order can be changed!

IDEA: Intro to Outer Join
REVIEW: Outer join basically includes rows that is not qualified with the join constraint which on the other way applicable in the inner join. There are 3 types of outer join: left outer join, right outer join, full outer join.

IDEA: Right outer Join
REVIEW: this means all rows in the RIGHT table will be in the JOIN result regardless has association to PK in LEFT table.
QUESTION: which one is the RIGHT relation in the QUERY statement?
HACK: SELECT <columns,...> FROM <this is the left table> LEFT/RIGHT JOIN <right table> ON <join condition>
WARNING: Right JOIN is seldom used mostly users will use LEFT JOIN and just swap the left table in the FROM query with the right table after the JOIN query. This is to avoid confusion and maintain consistency.

IDEA: JOIN with NOT NULL Columns
REVIEW:this is where we learn in order to JOIN we need to consider which table is the most significant and cannot be deleted (for every row) and thus that table is the one you need to be in the most LEFT when using OUTER LEFT JOIN.

IDEA: Outer JOIN Across 3 tables
REVIEW:
QUESTION: 3 tables users, comments, videos; relationship: users 1 : many comments many : 1 videos, make LEFT join to Users and then RIGHT JOIN to videos!
WARNING: the last RIGHT JOIN to the videos will omit all users that not have comment since all comment requires video ID to be posted. This will have the same effect as INNER JOIN of 3 tables in the end!
HACK: SELECT comments.comment AS comment, videos.title AS "video title", users.name FROM comments RIGHT JOIN videos ON comments.videoID_FK = videos.videoID_PK RIGHT JOIN users ON comments.userID_FK = users.userID_PK
NOTE: regarding the WARNING above the RIGHT JOIN on the video will gave effect similar to INNER JOIN since the many comments to one video relationship in nature. However, the next RIGHT JOIN to the user will act more like an OUTER JOIN since there are users that might not submit any comment but will still listed in the end result of the JOIN.
WARNING: This procedure will emphasis to use comment relation as the main relation since inside this relation will be two FKs which are userID_FK and videoID_FK thus those FKs are present in the ON queries on both sequence of RIGHT JOINs.

IDEA: Alias
REVIEW: In SQL this using the AS query
HACK: FIND THE EXAMPLE IN W3 => SELECT email AS contact, first_name AS "first name", last_name AS "last name" FROM Users

IDEA: self JOIN
REVIEW: This is often overlapping in function with SELECT query with WHERE query as qualifier.
COMBAK: THIS IS GOOD PRACTICAL EXAMPLE IN THE VIDEO BUT TOO LONG TO WRITE ! back to https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ztHopE5Wnpc&t=28333s
HACK: most likely the self join requires ALIAS as means to copy the same tables. => SELECT table1.username, table1.birthday, table2.username AS "referral user" FROM users AS table1 JOIN user AS table2 ON table1.refered_by=table2.user_id
